Hey, this is Politics and Science, and I'm your host, John Barkhausen, and this is the
special extended interview with Ray Peat, done on the 4th of March, 2015. With Ray from
the studios is WMRW, and the subject was evolution and Lamarck, although that hardly gets mentioned.
Anyway, just a few things about the show. I had some technical problems, so I think
there's some distortion throughout. Ray was recording at too high a volume, and I apologize
for that. Anyway, for what it's worth, here's the interview with Ray Peat, and I hope you
enjoy it. Thanks.
It's all right again. Okay.
But now you have the echo. No, I don't think there's an echo. There's
a faint echo, but a slight hum. Okay, well, if you can live with it.
Yeah, the hum isn't bad. Okay. All right, so Ray Peat, as I said, I guess
nobody heard this, has a PhD in biology and has a speciality in physiology, and if you
wouldn't mind, Ray, maybe you could introduce yourself a little more.
Okay. My dissertation was on reproductive physiology, female aging influence on the
oxidative processes in the uterus, actually. But I went to graduate school in biology after
having studied literature and linguistics previously with the intention of studying
the brain and how the brain can create language, because the brain biology people were the
most dogmatic next to the genetics people. I looked around and found that the reproductive
physiology professor was actually a scientist, so I did my work in that area.
I see, and you've been interested in science your whole life. It's fairly impressive that
as a child you were reading many scientific texts. And when did you first run into the
subject of the origin of life and evolution, which is what we'll be talking about today?
We had a little old Funk and Wagnalls encyclopedia. My parents got it around 1930, I think, and
that was where I first ran into some of the really interesting science things when I was
seven or eight or nine years old. Then in 1950 we got the new Britannica, which had
bigger articles, but both of them were very objective on the issue of Lamarckism versus
Darwinism. So I had heard about the inheritance of acquired traits when I was probably eight
years old or so. One of the stories that struck in my mind was done by Michael Geyer at the
University of Wisconsin. I think he ground up the eyes of rabbits and injected them to
produce antibodies and treated pregnant rabbits so that they became immune to the eyeball
tissue. The babies were born with defective eyes and then he cross-mated these offspring
and found that the defective eyes were inherited as if they were genetic traits in subsequent
generations. No one really repeated that as far as I know, and it was pretty widely accepted.
He was a very standard, mostly Darwinian biologist. I think some of his articles are available
on the internet. He was doing that research around the same time that Paul Kammerer in
Vienna was experimenting with some marine invertebrates and with toads. I think he used
salamanders to show that when they acquired an adaptation, mating them, the offspring
would show traits that had been acquired by the parents. Paul Kammerer was viciously attacked.
He committed suicide in 1926 in the midst of a very intense attack against his midwife
toad. Someone had apparently injected ink into the spot that was supposed to be an inherited
mating pad on the toad's feet. The person who mostly condemned him as a fraud, William
Bateson, a hardline English geneticist, when Kammerer sent samples of his specimens to
England, he invited the biologists to examine them. Several well-known biologists did examine
them and reported that they were convincing, but William Bateson refused to go to the meeting
to examine the specimens. Then he immediately resumed his attacks. So Bateson really didn't
want to look at the evidence because he knew it was not there.
So maybe just backing up a little bit, maybe you could tell us why it's important, the
debate over the theories of evolution and what's going on. Why are people getting so
upset about this? It's really an essentially religious or political
argument. The whole mystique of science wants to say that there is a simple objective science.
You follow a certain method and you get an absolute result. If you don't get what you
should get, then it has to be pseudoscience or fraud. But the context is very closely
related to your social, economic, political, religious background and beliefs. If you look
at Darwin, for example, he was a pretty progressive thinker in a lot of ways. He was against slavery,
for example. I think he went to the Unitarian Church even though his father wanted to bring
him up as a Church of England mainliner. He was essentially from the upper class, had
the habits and way of life of the ruling class. Even though despite his progressive traits
in some ways, he was really in the mainline of nineteenth century British imperialist
thinking. That quality stuck with the idea of Darwinian evolution and the social Darwinists
actually developed what was an essential part of Darwin's thinking. That was a little later
taken up by the fascists. Eugenics had a Darwinian genetic basis, racial improvement and so on.
People who want to claim Darwin as sort of their intellectual ancestor don't like to
recognize that he was a pretty crazy imperialist racist. He believed that even English plants
were better than plants in other countries and would displace them if given the opportunity.
Just like the English people and Europeans would finally exterminate and eliminate by
competition the intermediate races between the higher apes and the civilized Europeans.
He believed that even the higher apes along with Australians and Africans would go out
of existence because of the superiority of Europeans. When you see people in the twentieth
century like William Jennings Bryan denouncing evolution, they were really against the whole
racist fascist inclination of so many people. The eugenics movement was very distasteful
to some of the traditional middle and lower class Christian thinking.
So the idea of where we all came from is a very powerful one in manipulating people to
be on your side of your ideology, I suppose. It's about as inarticulate as I could possibly
say that. It seems like it's a very key idea that people are wrestling over to win the
argument over whose ideology is best. Yes, the way science is taught, it really
doesn't free itself from ideology. And so whatever the ideological system that existed
around your physics professors and their professors, this ideology gets built into a belief of
how science works, how the brain works even. It is a philosophy of the nature of being,
the nature of the universe, the creation of the universe, and all of that is built into
these so-called objective things that students are taught.
My professors in all of the sciences just didn't want to think about their philosophical
commitments. It was scientific and that was that.
They wouldn't look at any of their preconceptions? Yes. The extent of philosophy might have been
to have read Percy Bridgman's operationalism approach to saying that if you can't measure
it, it isn't real. Some professors with a philosophical mind saw that as their philosophical
foundation. You are the reason this show is called Politics
and Science because I think like many people, before I read your writings, which by the
way are available at Raypeat.com, many of your newsletters are up there, I thought science
was science and it was an objective art that was practiced by dedicated people with lots
of integrity. I didn't think business interests or corruption, which is also business interests,
or vanity played any role in it, but it turns out it's just as subject to all the human
vices as any other field. Early in the 20th century, you could trace
the personality of the academic culture to the 19th century conflicts between the different
attitudes towards religion, whether the old pre-enlightenment religion should still be
in power in government and education or whether a newer 18th, 19th century loosening up of
religious ideas should be the rule. But it didn't go beyond either of those. The missing
thing was to see that there is a conflict between essentialism, which was the old absolutist
religious approach, the platonic thing that, for example, species never change because
they are these timeless identities, and the conflict between that essentialist and the
empirical or existentialist looking at the actual historical situation that you see in
front of you, that's where the real difference in interpreting science comes in.
You can see it in every field of science. The anti-essentialists tend to be on the fringe
and not fully accepted by any of the sciences. For example, in cosmology, you have the electric
universe people, very good, coherent descriptions of observed facts against the big bang mechanistic
type of universe. And Halton Arp, the astronomer who made pictures of galaxies that were visibly
connected to each other but moving at very different velocities, tremendously different
velocities that you can't have things tied together that are moving at extremely different
speeds, meaning that they're at extremely different distances according to the redshift
big bang theory. The reason that he was able to see and think about that sort of thing
was that he wasn't committed to an essentialist idea that every atom is the same at every
moment of time and every place in the universe. If you start by observing things, then you
might conclude that atoms aren't the same at every time and place.
Right. And you've talked about him before on my show and probably others. It's interesting
that it all boils down, I guess, even in the field of biology to your school of thought,
whether you've started off, I think as you've explained it, with the essentialist form or
the empirical form. And you said before, I think, that Aristotle was the founder of the
empirical movement? Yeah. I think he was just about as fully developed
as anyone as a thinker. The philosophers of the scholastic period a thousand years ago
did some fairly ridiculous things in the name of Aristotle worship. But people like Leibniz
were still thinking in some of Aristotle's ideas. For example, the analyzing cause into
the different types of causality, including final cause, the condemnation of teleological
explanations has been a big part of the essentialist mechanistic science.
But Leibniz was able to, for example, explain the physics of optics using Aristotelian final
causes in his mathematical descriptions and showed that it worked just as well as the
mechanical billiard ball kind of causality. One thing hits another and the cause moves
only in that direction rather than taking into account the end condition as well as
the starting condition. Leibniz wanted to see the causality as a global holistic way
of existence. And I think you've pointed out before, and
you can say this over if you like, but the East or the Eastern Orthodox branch of knowledge,
the Russians basically went off primarily with the Aristotelian viewpoint and the West
somehow adopted the Platonic viewpoint. So we're all, I mean, I think that accounts for
our love of modeling instead of gathering empirical evidence. We're currently in a big
festival of creating mathematical models and imposing that on reality and trying to make
it fit. The teleological approach is fully compatible
with the evidence-based, historical, fact-centered approach. It just looks at generality and
laws in a different way that doesn't insist that they are outside of time and absolute
and that things can only obey them in a simple and abstract way. So it's open to complexity
in a way that the essentialist, Platonist approach isn't.
And bringing that history back to the history of evolution or the evolution of evolution,
how has the evolutionary thought developed over the years? Maybe you could give us a
summary of East versus West or if it's not... In Darwin's time, the racist approach tried
to explain everything in terms of your existing present biology, which was explained in terms
of your genetic nature. It said that how you came to be with this nature was a purely random
affair and that the only way to change the situation generally is to select out the inferior,
not to improve them, because things essentially aren't open to change and improvement. So
what you measure is what was destined from the start and can never be changed. So it's
seeing the future in terms of defining past or worse. You can delete the inferior species,
but you can't improve them. So it necessarily leads to either intentional or incidental
genocide in which inferior plants, inferior people, inferior animals will go out of existence
simply because improvement isn't possible. So that amounts to saying that the future
can be cleaned up by eliminating the random inferiority of all of the species except those
in England and Europe, but it rejects the idea of improving the world.
In that ideology you just expressed there of basically getting rid of inferior people
and things, was that expressed before Malthus came along?
I think it developed as they realized that the moneyed class had better health, everything
better. The ideology was intended to keep down the demands of the working classes. So
Malthus really just codified an ideology and Darwin, being a member of the upper class,
found that compatible with his way of thinking. I see Vernadsky's use of the Le Chatelier
principle that if a system is in equilibrium and you disturb the system, it adjusts itself
to come to a new equilibrium. Vernadsky saw the cosmos as an energy system and life as
part of the system that is adjusting the equilibrium as the system is energized from the outside.
So he saw evolution as having a direction, but in a way it was teleological because he
showed that it would maximize the movement of atoms, the intensity of metabolism in organisms,
and the maximization of size, especially of the nervous system and the brain. So the flow
of energy was giving shape to his system. Every part of the system was part of the equilibrium
which opened the change, but the change was directional in the sense of improving the
equilibrium and function of the whole system. And that's what you mean by teleological,
that's purposefulness? Yes, you think about equilibrium and the end
condition as well as the starting condition. You have to think in terms of a whole system
and the interactions through time so that everything has a history and all of the parts
and levels interact with each other so that there's no part of the system that isn't interacting.
So there's no place for one of these essential platonic forms, which Mendel, for example,
intended to identify as trait genes so that you could have the fixed species. He let the
traits vary by rearrangement, but the traits and the genes were really essential, timeless,
forever fixed forms. It's really a very pure religious imposition on key traits in Mendel's
case. It just seems like the pot calling the kettle
black there because you've got him insisting on these ideal forms, which sounds religious,
but he's calling the people who believe in teleological or purposeful adaptation, he's
calling them vitalists or superstitious people. Yes, and the people who own the schools, universities,
publishing houses are in a better position to denounce others as frauds and pseudoscientists
and so on. But actually, there's a tremendous amount of fake science hiding among the genetics
culture. Eugenics was part of the biological gene culture in the United States. The Journal
of Eugenics, after Hitler lost the war and was discredited, they changed their name to
the Journal of Human Genetics, but the people didn't change their ideas. They still worshipped
the doctrines of Conrad Lorenz, who devised Hitler's genocide rationale.
Yeah, that's right. We've talked about that before. He was lauded in this country as a
friendly scientist. He was on the cover of Life magazine when I was a kid.
Yeah, and after he got the Nobel Prize, my professors, every one of them, including the
immigrants, the Jewish, Hungarian, Austrian immigrants who had escaped Europe around 1939
and 1940, they were praising Conrad Lorenz and the very ideas that were published to
justify the extermination. Yeah, I looked that up after we talked last
time. He was apparently very influential in convincing the German public that the Jews
had to be removed like a cancer from Europe. Yeah, and his book that was published, I think
it was around 1970, he used exactly the same sentences except he used a slight euphemism
instead of exterminated. I think he used some milder term, but even though that was in his
newest book, these professors somehow made a disconnect and saw it as their very own
personal philosophy of the world. It's a good example of how dangerous science
or influential scientists gone bad can be. They have a powerful podium that they speak
from behind and they can be very influential in a terrible way.
Ray, I was thinking maybe you could walk us through from which your conception of the
history of evolution is from the origin of life, maybe as you see it, but also as other
people have proposed, and bring us up to Darwin and Lamarck, if that's something you're able
or interested in doing. I'm inclined to see Sidney Fox's approach
as being at least a good image or analog of how the process works. He worked in Linus
Pauling's lab and was a professor in regular biology departments supported, I think, by
NASA and other government funding. But his conclusions, his results were very clear,
just didn't resonate with the genetics of biological schools. His crucial series of
experiments showed that the Urey-Miller bubbling primitive atmosphere supposedly with methane
and ammonia and sparking up getting amino acids, he did variations on that, cooking
ammonia and carbon dioxide in various ways in the presence of hot rocks. He found that
protein-like things spontaneously polymerized and the arrangement was nonrandom. If he had
eight or ten amino acids cooking together, the proteins that spontaneously formed on
the surface of the hot rocks had a nonrandom arrangement as if the amino acids were interacting
in such a way that they chose their position according to stability in some sense, rather
than just randomly falling together. In a certain arrangement, the heat with a very
small amount of water letting them dry out and then adding a small amount of water to
this hot spontaneously formed protein, they spontaneously formed little bacteria-like
spheres of very uniform in size. The bulk of the protein would take on this bacteria-like
shape spontaneously. When new amino acids were added, these shapes could divide like
cells or bud off parts that would then grow up to the bacteria-sized particle about a
micron in diameter, I think it was, so they could eat and reproduce. To a mixture of these
amino acid proteins and spheres, he found that adding the bases of the nucleic acids,
these two would polymerize inside the little bacteria-like particles and would form nucleic
acid chain polymers, again, which were nonrandomly arranged apparently by the nature of the bases
themselves and their context, the nature of the nonrandom protein structures around them.
So the ordering process doesn't require any kind of input up to this stage. Neither a
divine watchmaker specifying that they should have this sequence and shape, nor the infinitely
long spans of time that the crude Darwinian viewpoint suggested in which a random change
would be selected by the outside environment and become nonrandom through a series of adaptive
selections. Yeah, that's amazing. So he just did that by adding amino acids to hot volcanic
rock which presumably had some chemical attributes to it that made that stuff happen. He simplified
the procedure so that high school students could create life in an hour lab session.
That's a good science project. Wow. Make you feel like God.
That is a sort of a primitive single cell arrangement with nucleic acid possible precursors
to genetic material, but it seems like a very plausible way to see the first bacteria coming
into existence. The underwater vents in the ocean, there's a volcano spewing constantly
material into the deep ocean water. These are full of very weird types of organisms.
Looking at that as an analogy to Sidney Fox's experiments, it suggests that you might get
with a bigger lab setup, you might get something much closer to presently existing organisms
just in a matter of minutes or hours. When you have extreme pressure, for example, and
high temperature. Yeah, those underwater volcanic worms are
unbelievable. They're way down, very low in the ocean, so lots of pressure and intense
heat coming out too. Is that correct? Yeah. I think usually there's a lot of sulfur
and carbon dioxide, but each volcanic vent has its chemical particularity.
So is that theory of life developing, gaining more acceptance? Because I would think it's
very difficult to go on with any other kind of theory in that case, looking at that evidence.
I mentioned it to my professors in my qualifying exam. None of them had heard about it, even
though it was in Leninger's biochemistry textbook. They hadn't heard about it. I looked at the
edition that came out in Leninger's name after he died and Fox's work had been removed. So
I think there was a move away from it after Fox died. But I don't think anything has come
near to replacing it. You wrote in Generative Energy under the chapter
called Another View of Evolution, you wrote, "The thought that lifeforms might just sort
of gush up out of the earth in volcanic regions makes it all seem too easy. Where might it
lead if people started believing that life could originate without a struggle for existence?"
And what do you think they're afraid of, Ray? I'm sure it's that the Malthusian and Darwinian
hatred of the lower classes, the feeling that if they were given a chance, they would displace
the ruling class. So it really comes down to politics.
Yes, and the very present attitude of the American ruling class is that they have the
right to kill anyone in the world they choose to. No legal process required, just choosing
names on the list is all that's necessary. That's right. Now even American citizens can
be taken out. Yes, it has different justifications. It was
a little more complex in Darwin's time, the various justifications for why Africans could
be exterminated. But the general attitude towards the working class has, from 1800 right
down to more or less the present time, the working class is seen as a threat. The word
class in politics, the only time I saw an American presidential candidate use the word
social class, that was the end of television paying attention to his candidacy. I forget
the candidate's name, but class isn't something that you can mention politically except to
denounce the union advocacy as a class warfare. You can denounce class warfare, but you can't
denounce class privilege. They have embedded in their thought process
is these Malthusian sort of ideas that the people are dispensable, I think, which is
an odd thing. We live in a democratic country and yet that's occurred in places like San
Francisco. Yeah, not only dispensable, but better off
without them. A lot of people are arguing that birth control, especially for the poor
in other countries, but they don't like to say it very loud, but birth control is a way
of eliminating the undesirables.
So stepping out of the political realm for a second, if we go back to those molecules
forming from the amino acids and then forming larger organizations of molecules, how do
you see life developing into actual organisms that have organelles within them and going
on from there to where we are now? The Sidney Fox particles could interact with
each other. If you have a whole planet full of such things, the interactions every time
you get something that is a little more stable, this will spread horizontally. It isn't necessarily
a matter of descendants, but it will spread its influence by contact with its contemporaries.
So things can spread much faster than the idea of inheritance and the selection of the
fittest and so on. The bacteria are now known to be able to spread
their resistance to antibiotics horizontally so that they don't have to evolve as descendants
of the immune individual, but that one can give it to all of his neighbors. So you get
an explosive change in populations. If you have a planet that's full of these simple
things, the tendency is for them to accumulate more and more of the stabilizing, activating
structures. I see it as an example of Vernadsky's "apply the right pressure and temperature
conditions and so on" and the system spontaneously moves in that direction as being driven by
the environmental conditions. I think it's a very quick process to come
to the single cell that's extremely well endowed with the so-called genetic material, the nucleic
acids. Just by following the Vernadsky principle, we'll tend to complexify so that instead of
simple bacteria, you get very well endowed things like amoebas, very complex single-celled
organisms. I think it was James Shapiro who talked about the bacterial self-engineering
of their genetic material. I think he was maybe the first one that proposed that the
movement from a protozoan-type organism to a multicellular organism could also be almost
spontaneous in which this over-endowed single cell finds a situation in which colonizing,
co-dominating with its neighbors, leads it to a new level of metabolism and stability.
I think the Vernadsky principle applies not only the move from the protein to the fox
particle and the fox particle to the full bacterium and the bacterium to the amoeba,
but also from the amoeba to the multicelled organism.
Wow. Vernadsky was a Russian geophysicist? Is that what his official title was?
Yeah. He had a theory of how soil was formed and that led him to a new view of cosmology
and of organisms and so on. He didn't draw any lines and so in trying to understand the
soil, he had to understand the history of the organisms that made it and the history
of the cosmos and the energy supplies that supported those organisms interacting and
making their environment.
Just that the organisms make their environment in a sense and then they choose the way they
will be in the environment so they make themselves as well as the environment. But it's the whole
system that is making the whole thing possible.
I really like that idea. We just had a question come in about what you were saying earlier.
This is from Duncan and the question goes like this. It's by email. People can email
politicsandscience@madriver.com if they want to send an email in.
Duncan says, "Is it possible to fix the class warfare problem? If so, then how? Are there
any ways to do it non-violently? What are the best materials to study for propaganda
and revolution? Will the class warfare problem always exist considering inherent human nature?"
I think it's a metaphysical problem essentially in which I think it was about 1870 or 1875
when William Morris said, "Where will this culture end? With a counting house on top
of a cinder pile?" That was very close to the way the climate change seems to be leading
us, ashes and money.
I think it's basically a metaphysical thing that if you see the mechanical commitment
to the past leading its way into the future, you end up with that cinder pile. To avoid
that you have to change your metaphysics to the Leibnizian or Aristotelian view in which
the final cause has to be taken into account. Leibniz and Teilhard de Chardin attended a
Bernadsky lecture on the noosphere. Chardin was an archaeologist, anthropologist, priest
and he saw this end point as a God consciousness. That was how Leibniz expressed it, that the
end condition was moving towards in some way a fuller expression of Godness. However you
express the end conditions, Bernadsky didn't have that sort of an end in mind. He described
it as a universe of consciousness, the noosphere, in which knowledge and awareness became the
governing principle. However you see the end condition, I think you have to start thinking
in terms of final causes and get back to Aristotle at least. Once you take that into account
that maybe it isn't so good to reduce the planet to ashes and money, then maybe you
can work on solutions. Part of the solution is to stop thinking about class superiority
and racial superiority and so on. When you say the end conditions, does that
mean you have to imagine how you'd like the world to be and then intend to make it that
way? Yes. The final cause was the purpose, where
you mean to go. By denouncing teleological thinking at any level, they said that the
bottom line is that you want to make your money and you don't care what it costs the
other person or the environment. The strict one-directional idea of causality, you work
on what's local and profitable and disregard the outcome because according to that metaphysics,
the outcome is always a matter of degradation, the elimination of what was unsuccessful.
You're listening to WMRW LP Warren. We're talking to Dr. Raymond Peet. He has a PhD
in biology and specializes in physiology. We're talking around the subject of evolution
and how you think about that is important. On that line of thinking, anthropology is
an area that is very closely connected to evolutionary thinking. Despite the fact that
the academic anthropology in the U.S. has been very strongly guided by the CIA recruiting
anthropologists as agents to learn how to control the inferior masses of the world,
despite that pretty much takeover by the government, there are these evolutionary lines of thinking
in anthropology that are very promising. The Margaret Mead approach that cultures don't
have to be static, that the people make the culture and so they can change the culture.
Professor Franz Boas at Columbia thought of himself as a Darwinist
and evolution-oriented thinker, but when he actually studied the facts, he was showing
that the environment rather than the genes govern even the person's biology, not only
their language and thoughts and culture and ordinary everyday behavior, but even the shape
of their organism. He measured the heads of Europeans who had moved either to New York
or Puerto Rico and found that the first generation offspring of these immigrants had heads shaped
more like New Yorkers or Puerto Ricans than like the European parents.
Even though he thought of himself as a Darwinist, it showed the powerful importance of the material
and the social culture that people move into, shaping even the organism, the body.
Here's another question, I'll just take this as it comes, it's also from Duncan.
Is empathy evolutionarily advantageous?
I see empathy as the universal principle of substance, the absolute opposite of the essentialist
view of reality. If you break the world up into like Mitzian monads, the essentialist
says that the monads are closed. The existence of empathy implies that each unit of existence
is open and interacting with its environment. So I see empathy as expressible in physical
terms such as resonance. In the case of empathizing with a person or animal, you tune your nervous
system so that it in effect is resonating with the conditions of the other's nervous
system. But I see it as something that is explaining
why the amino acids take on a nonrandom arrangement in Fox's molecules, why certain structures
are stable that happen to look like small bacteria. Resonance is a stabilizer on the
atomic level, the chemical cellular level and so on, as well as the organismic level
resonance of the nervous systems. I like that a lot, culturally too in the form
of music and ideas that resonate. Luca Turin, there are some lectures by him.
He's a perfume expert, but his theory of psychoactive drugs or of hormones and so on,
as well as odor molecules, is based on the idea that it's an electronic resonance between
the molecule and the cell that accounts for the specificity. He gives many examples in
which molecules that resonate have the same smell or the same biological effect despite
having a different shape, or that molecules with the same shape that are different vibratory
frequency don't have the same biological effect.
Where did you run into him, Ray? Reading about perfume, I guess. The Science
News around 1951 had an article about the person who originated that theory, or actually
a follower of the person who originated the theory. It started in the 1930s, but I saw
this article in Science News in the early 50s. Luca Turin is updating those lines of
thinking. I had a basic question about evolution. Basically,
we're made out of the material the world's made out of, our bodies and everything on
the earth. Are we basically just an evolution of the actual material that we're made out
of, the elements of the earth? Or is it just a building of complexity of those materials?
I think the resonant properties are the properties that matter to us. We can substitute sometimes
molecules that aren't exactly the same in form or substance, but that have the same
remarkable range of biologically valuable functions, even though it's something that
we're never involved with, that it has an electronic property that fits in and stabilizes
or enriches our system. Okay, at this point, we had a Skype fallout.
The distortion got so bad, Ray couldn't hear me, and I had to call him back. So it goes
away pretty quickly. But at any rate, I apologize for yet another audio problem.
Hello? Can you hear me now?
Oh, it's better, but still pretty scrunchy. Still scrunchy. Gosh, I don't know what's
going on. But I can understand you now.
Okay. You said something about methylene blue was
the last. That's correct. And I've heard you say that
it's a supplement you can take that will actually improve your cellular energy function.
Yeah, yeah. Even though it's a weird molecule, it happens to electronically fit in, even
though there's no structural analog that's exactly like it.
And do you think using materials like that, finding them out of the environment and using
them because we find some benefit from them, is that part of our evolutionary and probably
all life's evolutionary process? Yeah, I think so. I think things analogous
to that have happened at different stages, that something that is available and increases
our efficiency, give us sort of a stepping stone to do something else.
I know there was a book, I think it was called Food of the Gods. I could have that wrong,
but it was postulating that our consciousness did a radical shift and improvement sometime
in ancient history when we discovered psilocybin mushrooms that went along with the cow plops
that came out of following cow herds around the world or Africa. And I was wondering what
you thought about the evolution of consciousness.
I think things such as the amount of carbon dioxide in the air, the amount of particular
nutrients in the diet, the balance of amino acids and such very widely available things
are the main powers of increasing consciousness. But consciousness I see as simply one side
of the metabolic interactive process so that anything that increases our quality of metabolism
is increasing our ability to resonate with more complex and extensive systems. Things
like the mushrooms act as a lubricant that the organism might have a certain amount of
energy available and with just a little lubricant it might find that it can slide up to a new
metabolic level.
Sort of a lubricant that will help you have epiphanies about the life around you.
Yeah, and new ways of interacting. For example, I think there's a tendency of the offspring
of the ruling class to not have the appetite for the crazy things that their parents and
grandparents were committed to.
I see, so they've had a change of consciousness.
Yeah, I think there are bits of that happening over the last 40-50 years.
One of the things that you've written about a lot is Pavlov and Anokin, the Russian behavioral
scientists is that what you call them? And one of the things that you put down which
I thought was interesting was Pavlov's writing about that life has a biological urge for
freedom and I was wondering if you believe that and if that's a powerful evolutionary
force.
Yeah, I think it fits in to the idea of the noosphere. Pavlov's reflex of freedom was
also the exploratory reflex or the what is it reflex, always wanting to find out more.
When the culture or planet evolves beyond the urge to accumulate and gain power and
so on to the conscious noosphere level, then that reflex I think will be fully activated
and everything will become a question and an opportunity for discovery. So that instead
of being an end point, it becomes an opportunity for creation of new levels of being.
You also wrote that health can be seen as the coordination of the levels of evolution
and I know you do a lot of writing about health because that's a good window I think you've
said to connect with people and I thought that was very interesting. Maybe you could
talk about the levels of evolution and what those are and why coordinating those equals
good health.
I don't remember what I had in mind. Maybe something like Maslow's steps of development,
security, the need for enough food, the need for social interactions and mental stimulation
and finally Maslow's self-actualization. It might be analogous to the freedom reflex,
the opportunity to live for creative action.
Who was Maslow, Ray?
Abraham Maslow, the Brandeis psychologist, along with Carl Rogers. He was the great step
forward in psychology beyond Freudianism and behaviorism to humanistic psychology.
Bringing us back to empathy.
Carl Rogers was actually a sophisticated thinker with a phenomenological approach to science
and his understanding of therapy was that it's the interactive attempt of the therapist
to listen to and understand the client which is therapeutic. It's the resident in itself
which is therapeutic.
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Okay, we've got a question taking you back to the methylene
blue. It came in by email. It's from Duncan again. Considering higher energy levels, have
you tried methylene blue and if so, how does it feel versus progesterone or caffeine? Were
there any higher energy thinking abilities evident?
I've only been using it transdermally. That's my approach to understanding new chemicals
is to find what the smallest amount does and then work up in stages. So far, I see it as
just a good anti-inflammatory.
We'll wait for a further report as that progresses. Were you going to say something else, Ray?
No, but quite a few people are having very powerful anti-depression effects from it with
just one milligram a day. I think it's probably going to be effective at doses analogous to
thyroid hormone, 20, 30, 40 micrograms per day I think might be the optimal dose of methylene
blue.
All right. Take something blue to get rid of your blues. It sounds like, like you said,
if it works, it's raising your energy levels and that's a common theme.
It's known that it can bypass mitochondrial defects and I think that's a big part of why
it can cure very serious depression at such a small dose.
Wow. That's impressive. I have some, well, I wanted to talk a little bit, we have some
time left and I wanted to talk about Russian science. I know you've always been interested
in that and I was curious about your experience personally going to Russia. I know you went
there one summer to talk to scientists and they were all out at their, what do they call
them, dachas?
Dachas, yeah.
Dachas. I was wondering if you speak Russian, have you learned Russian?
No, I learned to read it.
Oh, you did?
I hoped that I would get to practice it, but I would go up to someone on the street and
ask them directions or something in Russian and every one of them said, "I'm sorry, I
don't speak Russian." They were all from the other republics on vacation in Moscow.
I see. Nice try though. Did you meet any scientists when you went?
Yeah, I went to Lysenko's place where he was working and it happened that I was there on
the day he wasn't, but one of his assistants took me around. Yuri Holodov was the person
studying magnetobiology, he called it, as opposed to biomagnetism, the influence of
magnetic fields on the nervous system in particular. This person, I guess, called him up and we
went over on the bus and dropped in without warning. He took the time to talk to us, answer
our questions. His first question was, "What are you studying and where?" I said, "I plan
to enroll at the University of Oregon in nerve biology." He said, "Oh, are you going to work
with a professor who just that quarter had left the university?" He was up to the nerve
the present year at least, who was doing nerve research in the universities. He didn't know
in advance that I was from Oregon, but just instantly knew who the professors would be
at Oregon. Were you speaking Russian with him?
I forget. I think we might have been doing a mash of languages.
When you look into Russian literature, you're reading it in the original form, is that right?
Yeah.
Because it does seem like you have an awfully in-depth perception of what they're talking
about.
The translations are sometimes very obviously ideological. That's a great example of fraud
in American science, how they translated Soviet things. Israel did a lot of good translations
of Russian research.
That's good. Some of the scientific literature is available through Israeli publishers?
Yeah.
I see. Maybe since Trofim Lysenko ties in with the subject matter of evolution, maybe
you could outline for us what that was all about, and primarily the Russian stance on
evolution versus the Western stance.
Lysenko never was the czar of genetics. Even at the height of his power under Stalin, he
was always criticizing the university genetics people. He was basically like the state college
research stations, the crop improvement stations, where a lot of good science is done out in
the agricultural stations, not the universities. The universities stayed Western genetics oriented
right through Stalin, so we've been given a really false history of what Lysenko was
doing.
His research, I think it was Lewontin, an American Marxist biologist who examined the
actual grain production records in the years under Lysenko's influence. They were actually
increasing grain production steadily when they were applying the work he did at the
field research stations. The university genetics departments weren't producing anything of
value, but what they did was to take the seeds he developed out of these practical research
farm stations, take them to England, and give them to the anti-Soviet genetics people to
work with. The government learned that he was giving away the valuable seeds that Lysenko
had developed. That was where the prosecuting them for working with the enemy came in. It
was actually concrete events of giving stuff away without permission rather than any ideological
punishment.
Lysenko was always ridiculed in the West, wasn't he? His theories? Is that because he
was advocating the inheritability of acquired characteristics?
He emphasized the predominance of the cytoplasm and the nucleus was a reservoir of useful
stuff, but the changes and the adaptation was being done by the cell as a whole, but
especially being led by the cytoplasm. The adaptation of the organism involved changes
in the organization of the cytoplasm. People in the West were working on similar things
with cloning experiments, for example, where a nucleus would be removed or replaced by
a nucleus from a different species or even a different phylum. The cell would develop
if it was in an embryo. The embryo would develop according to the rules of the cytoplasm. The
genus or phylum that the cytoplasm came from would govern the shape of the organism, even
with a very remotely related nucleus.
The cloning experiments in which a nucleus, say from a skin cell, would be put into a
frog's egg. Frogs were the first things cloned because they have such big eggs and are easy
to do surgery on. In the 1960s, Western biologists were working on the changes happening in the
cytoplasm that would be inherited, like with a paramecium. If you take a bit of the surface
and turn it around so that the cilia beat in reverse, as that organism has descendants,
they all have the reversed cilia in that spot, showing that you do have very clear inheritance
of things that happen to the cytoplasm, which is all that was essential in Lee Sanko's thinking.
The idea of stress increasing variability simultaneous, or maybe five or ten years after
Lee Sanko was writing about it, Barbara McClintock was finding the same things in her work with
corn, that stress increased the variability and adaptability of the organism, changing
the chromosomes.
So how is it that they were so intent on making fun of Lee Sanko? Basically, they put him
in the same boat as Lamarck, who we've hardly talked about in this whole show, which was
going to be about Lamarck, but we said we'd be talking around him. We successfully avoided
him.
Barbara McClintock came so close to Lee Sanko and Lamarck in showing that stress changes
heredity. She was sort of hostilely ignored by the profession for forty years, I guess
it was. Then with genetic engineering, when people wanted to patent new genes, they realized
that it would be good to have some actual scientific precedent to make them sound nicer,
that they weren't just changing DNA to make a profitable product.
They resurrected from obscurity Barbara McClintock's work and gave her, I think, first the MacArthur
Prize and then the Nobel Prize, but forty years later, roughly, than her actual discoveries.
Another line of evidence related to Lee Sanko and McClintock and genes, you remember Darwin
proposed that since he knew that farmers could improve their animals and plants by selection,
he wanted to say something about acquired traits being passed on. He had the idea of
gemmules or pen genes, which were the idea that something that the organism acquired
through experience in a particular organ or all of the organs, that these were shed from
a particular part of the organism and reached the gonads to be taken up in the germline
as the evidence or the expression of the environmental modification that had happened to the organism.
That idea was too Lamarckian for anyone up until Lee Sanko's time, that something could
pass from the cytoplasm or the cell of the body and be taken up in the germline to be
passed on. That was where Darwin and Lee Sanko and Lamarck were all put down totally.
But in the last ten or twenty years, it really can be traced back to a North Korean, Bongun
Kim, who in the 60s published his work, which was repeated only, as far as I know, by two
Japanese. He showed that there were particles carrying nucleic acids through a lymphatic-like
conductive system that he thought accounted for how acupuncture could cause changes in
other parts of the organism. He thought these particles of nucleic acid were being transmitted
along the meridians of acupuncture, but he demonstrated microscopically these particles
and their chemical RNA content, for example. But only in the last ten or fifteen years,
people have bothered to look at the particles in the plasma or serum. Under an electron
microscope it looked just sort of like dust, undefined, very small particles, smaller than
bacteria, like a tenth of the diameter of even a small bacterium. These little particles,
just billions of them everywhere, you can find them in the blood, the lymph, saliva,
urine, every body fluid is full of these little particles. They are now known to in fact carry
RNA, proteins, fats, and even DNA. It has been demonstrated that the DNA carried in
these particles can be incorporated into the germ cells and transmitted. So basically Darwin's
gemmules now are called exosomes or microvesicles or ectosomes by different people.
So he may have been a classist and racist, but he was pretty far-seeing.
Yes, he was an intelligent observer and sometimes a very imaginative thinker.
And he did not rule out many of the mechanisms that Lamarck talked about for passing on acquired
characteristics, is that right?
Yes. In his "Descend of Man," I think it was, in one of the introductions to that he said,
"My opponents are saying that I'm all about the natural selection, but in fact here are
the points that I believe in." He listed several inheritance of acquired traits and sexual
selection and several points other than natural selection.
Samuel Butler in two or three books while Darwin was still alive was denouncing Darwin
for neglecting to acknowledge his debt to both Lamarck and his grandfather, Erasmus
Darwin. I think Samuel Butler was very accurate in saying that Darwin was just too cowardly
to be very public about his Lamarckism.
Yes, it's amazing it carried such a stigma and still does. I mean, people are still laughing
at Lamarck even though he seems to be in a large part correct about how things work.
I have a quick question. I hope that it's quick because we don't have much time. But
what was Blake, I know you're a great scholar of William Blake, who lived, I think was a
contemporary with Erasmus Darwin, and what was Blake's opinion on evolution?
He didn't use any such language, but he obviously had read Erasmus Darwin's "Zoolomia" and
Emanuel Swedenborg's "Physiology," things that ordinary embryology and anatomy didn't
recognize until the twentieth century. Blake, I'm sure, got them from knowing Swedenborg's
writings. Swedenborg lived in London in his old age, and Swedenborg had identified the
brain anatomy of the nervous system and its development. Seeing the nature of the developing
embryo combined with Erasmus Darwin's picture of all organisms developing from a single,
simple fiber, he said, or in one case he said everything from a seashell or a sea organism,
but a simple cell as the origin of all organisms was a current idea in London of the 1790s.
You can see those anatomical, flexible ideas in many places in Blake.
Here's a question from Prana Rupa. Would you be willing to speculate about future evolutionary
expressions both at the level of the biosphere as a whole and in relation to optimizing our
own potentialities? I think the environment, I think the increase
in carbon dioxide is going in the right direction. I think it increases adaptability, and so
I don't think we have to worry about carbon dioxide as contributing to extinction of species.
I think it increases everyone's flexibility and adaptability. I think the tendency of
this increasing carbon dioxide is to support the process of cephalization, so I think the
direction will be bigger brains, further development of a lot of the abilities, especially the
imaginative types of mental processes. A question from Todd Mudd. He says, "Are evolutionary
steps really spontaneous? Do they happen in a single generation or are the changes gradual?
Does an energy charge build up and then suddenly make a change? Would the next physical changes
in humans to bigger heads, higher metabolic rates or something else?"
Okay, there's a similar question there. Yeah, I think it's happening intermittently.
One woman will have a remarkably advantageous pregnancy and will be sort of the forerunner
of a trend. It can happen immediately in one lucky group of organisms and more widespread
in the whole population when the whole situation is more fortunate.
And here's another question. I'm not sure if I have it right, but would another evolutionary
step have something to do with being aware of sensory processes and would it have something
to do with thinking and images rather than words?
The essentialist metaphysics, I think, is literally holding back physiological functioning
and evolution. The organism is impaired when it gets stuck in these verbal formulas, which
are the nature of the essentialist metaphysics. The brain loses energy and works on a low-energy
symbolic set of interactions. In Anokin's terms, from a perspective analogous to Luca
Turin's, from this perspective there's a conductive quality to the fluids of the brain and the
cells which allows a holistic, more encompassing kind of functioning so that any concrete thought
or image brings with it an interpretive context so that you see the meaning in all of its
expanded qualities rather than a symbolic formulation with links to other symbolic formulations.
You see, it's like a simultaneous picture in three dimensions and moving. When the brain
is properly energized, Anokin and Luca Turin, as dimensions of how this is described, when
the brain is properly energized, it forms these image complexes which bring with them
the interpretive context so that the sense of meaning is always part of understanding
the particular image.
That's fascinating. Especially a moving image is such a powerful method of communication.
You mentioned a talk by somebody called No More Secrets. Is that possibly where we're
evolving to, to telepathy?
I think, yeah, he makes some good arguments, Michael Persinger. He experimented with stimulating
the brain in different ways and getting what he called the God consciousness. I think that
sense of overwhelming meaning, that's just a natural brain process when it's properly
energized. When you think of an atom, you can't think of an abstract atom out of time.
Every atom has its own history.
In that family tree, I can hardly keep track of my own. Well, Ray, I'm afraid we're out
of time. I hate to do it. That was almost two hours with Dr. Raymond Peet. Thank you
so much for offering us your time and knowledge today here on WMRW. If all goes well, we'll
talk to you again next week about physiological implications of acid-base molecular electric
charges and reduction oxidation and their relation to each other. That's a subject I've
always gotten very confused by, so I'm looking forward to maybe getting less confused.
Okay.
Okay. Thanks so much, Ray.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Goodbye.
And you are listening to WMRW LP Warren, and we're about to go to the news here. I want
to thank everybody who helped participate and make the show more interesting.
This is an archive edition of a Ray Peet interview done on the 4th of March, 2015. With Ray,
this subject ostensibly was about evolution. And if you'd like more information, you can
go to rayPeat.com where he has many, many articles there for you to read for free. I've
been John Barkhausen. I still am, I hope, and hopefully do a few more interviews with
Ray. So thanks for listening and thanks to everybody who made this possible. I apologize
for the fact that there's some distortion. Obviously, I had some technical challenges
during the show, which hopefully I'll conquer next time around. All right. Thanks a lot
for listening.